.Dd Aug 20, 2008
.Dt ENMA 1
.Sh NAME
.Nm enma
.Nd A milter program for SPF and Sender ID
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl cvh
.Op Fl o Ar key=value
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a program of domain authentication technologies. It authenticates
message senders with SPF and/or Sender ID and inserts the
Authentication-Results: field with authentication results.
.Pp
Configurations have order of preference as follows:
.Pp
.Bl -enum -offset indent -compact
.It
The command line options
.It
The configuration file
.It
The default values
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl h
Displays available options.
.It Fl v
Verbose mode.
.It Fl c Ar filename
Specifies a configuration file.
.It Fl o Ar key=value
Specifies configuration below. 
.Sh CONFIGURATION FILE
Each line is in the format of "key:value". Spaces between "key:" and
"value" are ignored. Lines begging with '#' and empty lines are
ignored. If there is no configuration of a given "key:", its default
value is used.  Absolute paths must be used when specified.
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It milter.verbose (-v)
If true, log is recorded in detail. (Default value: false)
.It milter.conffile (-c)
Specifies the path to the configration file. If ommited, no
configuration file is read and the default values are used.  The -c
option should be used usually instead. (Default value: no value)
.It milter.user
Specifies a user name. If not specified, the user name of execution is
used. This is typically used to step down the user authority of enma
executed in a start-up script.  (Default value: no value)
.It milter.pidfile
Specify the path to the PID file. If milter.user is specified, the PID
file is written as the user. So, appropriate permission should be
given to the directory. (Default value: /var/run/enma/enma.pid)
.It milter.chdir
Specified a working directory after execution. If ommited, nothing
happens. (Default value: no value)
.It milter.socket
Specifies socket type of milter communication from MTA.  Choose one of
the followings:
.Bl -enum -offset indent -compact
.It
inet:<port number>@<IP adddress or hostname>
.It
unix:<a path to UNIX domain socket>
.El
For more information, refer to "cf/README" contained in the Sendmail
package. (Default value: inet:10025@127.0.0.1)
.It milter.timeout
Specifies timeout of milter communication with MTA in seconds.
(Default value: 7210)
.It milter.loglevel
Specifies log level of libmilter (not enma). This should be used for
debugging purpose.  For more information, please refer to
"libmilter/docs/smfi_setdbg.html" in the Sendmail package. (Default
value: 0)
.It milter.postfix
If true, MTA is Postfix. If false, MTA is Sendmail. (Default value:
false)
.It syslog.ident
Specified an identifier labeled to syslog messages. (Default value:
enma)
.It syslog.facility
Specifies facility of syslog. (Default value: local4)
.It syslog.logmask
Specifies mask of syslog.  Messages which level is over this value are
printed to syslog. Usually "info" should be specified. (Default
value: info)
.It spf.auth
If true, SPF authentication is processed.  (Default value: true)
.It spf.explog
If true, the "exp" modifier is evaluated in the case where SPF
authentication result is "hardfail".  For more information about the
"exp" modifier, refer to Section 6.2 of RFC4408.  (Default value:
true)
.It sidf.auth
If true, Sender ID authentication is processed. (Default value: true)
.It sidf.explog
If true, the "exp" modifier is evaluated in the case where Sender ID
authentication result is "hardfail".  For more information about the
"exp" modifier, refer to Section 6.2 of RFC4408.  (Default value:
true)
.It authresult.identifier
Specifies the hostname to identity the Authentication-Results:
field. If the Authentication-Results: field which has the same
identifier exists, the entire field is removed. Also, this identifier
is used when the Authentication-Results: field is inserted to record
authentication result.  (Default value: localhost)
.El
.Sh LOG
Log is recored to syslog. facility and mask of syslog are specified
with "syslog.facility" and "syslog.logmask", respectively.
.Sh EXAMPLE OF LOG
The case where authentication process was normally done:
.Bd -literal
[m75AKEOh009630] [SPF-auth] ipaddr=192.168.1.1, eval=smtp.mailfrom, helo=example.jp, envfrom=<user@example.jp>, score=pass
[m75AKEOh009630] [SIDF-auth] ipaddr=192.168.1.1, header.From=user@example.jp, score=pass
.Ed
.Pp
The case where authentication process was skipped because of lack of
authentication information:
.Bd -literal
[m75AKEOh009630] [SPF-auth] score=permerror
[m75AKEOh009630] [SIDF-auth] score=permerror
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION OF LOG ITEM
.Em Common
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It [m75AKEOh009630]
Queue ID to identify SMTP transaction labeled by MTA
.It [SIDF-auth], [SPF-auth]
[SIDF-auth] and [SPF-auth] mean authentication is done with Sender ID 
and SPF, respectively
.It ipaddr=192.168.1.1
The IP address of the sender
.It score=pass
Score of authentication result
.El
.Em SPF
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It eval=smtp.mailfrom
Which authentication information was used, either MAIL FROM or
EHLO/HELO.
.It helo=example.jp
EHLO/HELO provided by the sender
.It envfrom=<user@example.jp>
MAIL FROM provided by the sender
.El
.Em Sender ID
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It header.From=user@example.jp
The field name and the mail address used for authentication.
.El
.Sh SCORE
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It pass
Authentication success
.It hardfail
Authentication failure. The sender address is faked.
.It softfail
Authentication failure. The sender address would be faked.
.It neutral
Authentication impossible. Validity of the sender address cannot be
judged.
.It temperror
Authentication impossible. Authentication process cannot be continued
because of an error of communication with DNS.
.It syserror
Authentication impossible. Authentication process cannot be continued
because of, for instance, memory shortage.
.It permerror
Authentication impossible. SPF RR contains grammar errors.
.It none
The domain of the sender address does not declare SPF RR.
.El
